Prev: uuencode Invocation,  Up: Basic

2.4 Invoking uudecode
=====================

If no `file'(s) are provided, then standard input is decoded.
`uudecode' transforms uuencoded files into their original form.

   The encoded file(s) may be specified on the command line, or one may
be read from standard input.  The output file name is specified in the
encoded file, but may be overridden with the `-o' option.  It will have
the mode of the original file, except that setuid and execute bits are
not retained.  If the output file is specified to be `/dev/stdout' or
`-', the result will be written to standard output. If there are
multiple input files and the second or subsquent file specifies
standard output, the decoded data will be written to the same file as
the previous output.  Don't do that.

   `uudecode' ignores any leading and trailing lines.  It looks for a
line that starts with "`begin'" and proceeds until the end-of-encoding
marker is found.  The program determines from the header line of the
encoded file which of the two supported encoding schemes was used and
whether or not the output file name has been encoded with base64
encoding.  See `uuencode(5)'.

   This section was generated by *AutoGen*, using the `agtexi-cmd'
template and the option descriptions for the `uudecode' program.  This
software is released under the GNU General Public License, version 3 or
later.

* Menu:

* uudecode usage::                  uudecode help/usage (`--help')
* uudecode output-file::            output-file option (-o)
* uudecode ignore-chmod::           ignore-chmod option (-c)
* uudecode config::                 presetting/configuring uudecode
* uudecode exit status::            exit status
* uudecode Bugs::                   Bugs
* uudecode Standards::              Standards
* uudecode See Also::               See Also

Next: uudecode output-file,  Up: uudecode Invocation

2.4.1 uudecode help/usage (`--help')
------------------------------------

This is the automatically generated usage text for uudecode.

   The text printed is the same whether selected with the `help' option
(`--help') or the `more-help' option (`--more-help').  `more-help' will
print the usage text by passing it through a pager program.
`more-help' is disabled on platforms without a working `fork(2)'
function.  The `PAGER' environment variable is used to select the
program, defaulting to `more'.  Both will exit with a status code of 0.

uudecode (GNU sharutils) - decode an encoded file
Usage:  uudecode [ -<flag> [<val>] | --<name>[{=| }<val>] ]... [<file>...]

   -o, --output-file=str      direct output to file
   -c, --ignore-chmod         ignore fchmod(3P) errors
   -v, --version[=MODE]       output version information and exit
   -h, --help                 display extended usage information and exit
   -!, --more-help            extended usage information passed thru pager
   -R, --save-opts[=FILE]     save the option state to a config file FILE
   -r, --load-opts=FILE       load options from the config file FILE
                                - disabled with '--no-load-opts'
                                - may appear multiple times

Options are specified by doubled hyphens and their name or by a single
hyphen and the flag character.
If no 'file'(s) are provided, then standard input is decoded.

The following option preset mechanisms are supported:
 - reading file $HOME/.sharrc

'uudecode' transforms uuencoded files into their original form.

The encoded file(s) may be specified on the command line, or one may be
read from standard input.  The output file name is specified in the encoded
file, but may be overridden with the '-o' option.  It will have the mode of
the original file, except that setuid and execute bits are not retained.  If
the output file is specified to be '/dev/stdout' or '-', the result will be
written to standard output.  If there are multiple input files and the
second or subsquent file specifies standard output, the decoded data will
be written to the same file as the previous output.  Don't do that.

'uudecode' ignores any leading and trailing lines.  It looks for a line
that starts with "'begin'" and proceeds until the end-of-encoding marker is
found.  The program determines from the header line of the encoded file
which of the two supported encoding schemes was used and whether or not the
output file name has been encoded with base64 encoding.  See 'uuencode(5)'.

Please send bug reports to:  <bug-gnu-utils@gnu.org>

Next: uudecode ignore-chmod,  Prev: uudecode usage,  Up: uudecode Invocation

2.4.2 output-file option (-o)
-----------------------------

This is the "direct output to `file'" option.  This option takes a
string argument `file'.  If specified, decoded data are written to this
file.  When multiple inputs are specified on the command line, this
option cannot be specified.  All decoded data must be written to the
file name encoded in the data.

Next: uudecode config,  Prev: uudecode output-file,  Up: uudecode Invocation

2.4.3 ignore-chmod option (-c)
------------------------------

This is the "ignore `fchmod(3p)' errors" option.  By default, if the
output file permissions cannot be changed to the permissions specified
in the encoded data, the file will not be written out and execution
stops.  This option will cause that error to be ignored.  The resulting
file will have all the data, but the incorrect mode settings.

   `fchmod()' errors are also ignored if `POSIXLY_CORRECT' is set in
the environment.  RE: <http://austingroupbugs.net/view.php?id=635>

   A warning is always emitted when `fchmod()' fails.

Next: uudecode exit status,  Prev: uudecode ignore-chmod,  Up: uudecode Invocation

2.4.4 presetting/configuring uudecode
-------------------------------------

Any option that is not marked as not presettable may be preset by
loading values from configuration ("rc" or "ini") files.

`libopts' will search in `$HOME' for configuration (option) data.  The
environment variable `HOME, ' is expanded and replaced when the program
runs If this is a plain file, it is simply processed.  If it is a
directory, then a file named `.sharrc' is searched for within that
directory.

   Configuration files may be in a wide variety of formats.  The basic
format is an option name followed by a value (argument) on the same
line.  Values may be separated from the option name with a colon, equal
sign or simply white space.  Values may be continued across multiple
lines by escaping the newline with a backslash.

   Multiple programs may also share the same initialization file.
Common options are collected at the top, followed by program specific
segments.  The segments are separated by lines like:
    [UUDECODE]
   or by
    <?program uudecode>
   Do not mix these styles within one configuration file.

   Compound values and carefully constructed string values may also be
specified using XML syntax:
    <option-name>
       <sub-opt>...&lt;...&gt;...</sub-opt>
    </option-name>
   yielding an `option-name.sub-opt' string value of
    "...<...>..."
   `AutoOpts' does not track suboptions.  You simply note that it is a
hierarchicly valued option.  `AutoOpts' does provide a means for
searching the associated name/value pair list (see: optionFindValue).

   The command line options relating to configuration and/or usage help
are:

version (-v)
............

Print the program version to standard out, optionally with licensing
information, then exit 0.  The optional argument specifies how much
licensing detail to provide.  The default is to print the license name
with the version.  The licensing infomation may be selected with an
option argument.  Only the first letter of the argument is examined:

`version'
     Only print the version.

`copyright'
     Name the copyright usage licensing terms.  This is the default.

`verbose'
     Print the full copyright usage licensing terms.

Next: uudecode Bugs,  Prev: uudecode config,  Up: uudecode Invocation

2.4.5 uudecode exit status
--------------------------

One of the following exit values will be returned:
`0 (EXIT_SUCCESS)'
     Successful program execution.

`1 (EXIT_OPTION_ERROR)'
     The command options were misconfigured.

`2 (EXIT_INVALID)'
     (warning) One or more input files contained no valid data

`4 (EXIT_NO_INPUT)'
     (warning) The specified input file was not found

`8 (EXIT_NO_OUTPUT)'
     The specified output file could not be created (error); or else
     one of the output files could not be written or its access mode
     could not be changed (warnings).  The accompanying message(s) will
     distinguish.

`9 (EXIT_NO_MEM)'
     No process memory available

`66 (EX_NOINPUT)'
     A specified configuration file could not be loaded.

`70 (EX_SOFTWARE)'
     libopts had an internal operational error.  Please report it to
     autogen-users@lists.sourceforge.net.  Thank you.

Next: uudecode Standards,  Prev: uudecode exit status,  Up: uudecode Invocation

2.4.6 uudecode Bugs
-------------------

Please put `sharutils' in the subject line for emailed bug reports.  It
helps to spot the message.

   If more than one `name' in the encoded files are the same, or if the
second or following input files specifies standard output for the
output file, then the result is probably not what is expected.
Specifically, standard output will be appended to and named output
files will be replaced.

Next: uudecode See Also,  Prev: uudecode Bugs,  Up: uudecode Invocation

2.4.7 uudecode Standards
------------------------

This implementation is compliant with P1003.2b/D11.

Prev: uudecode Standards,  Up: uudecode Invocation

2.4.8 uudecode See Also
-----------------------

uuencode(1), uuencode(5)

