Next: uudecode Invocation,  Prev: unshar Invocation,  Up: Basic

2.3 Invoking uuencode
=====================

`uuencode' is used to create an ASCII representation of a file that can
be sent over channels that may otherwise corrupt the data.
Specifically, email cannot handle binary data and will often even
insert a character when the six character sequence "\nFrom " is seen.

   `uuencode' will read `in-file' if provided and otherwise read data
from standard in and write the encoded form to standard out.  The
output will begin with a header line for use by `uudecode' giving it
the resulting suggested file `output-name' and access mode.  If the
`output-name' is specifically `/dev/stdout', then `uudecode' will emit
the decoded file to standard out.

   *Note*: `uuencode' uses buffered input and assumes that it is not
hand typed from a tty.  The consequence is that at a tty, you may need
to hit Ctl-D several times to terminate input.

   This section was generated by *AutoGen*, using the `agtexi-cmd'
template and the option descriptions for the `uuencode' program.  This
software is released under the GNU General Public License, version 3 or
later.

* Menu:

* uuencode usage::                  uuencode help/usage (`--help')
* uuencode base64::                 base64 option (-m)
* uuencode encode-file-name::       encode-file-name option (-e)
* uuencode config::                 presetting/configuring uuencode
* uuencode exit status::            exit status
* uuencode Bugs::                   Bugs
* uuencode Standards::              Standards
* uuencode History::                History
* uuencode See Also::               See Also

Next: uuencode base64,  Up: uuencode Invocation

2.3.1 uuencode help/usage (`--help')
------------------------------------

This is the automatically generated usage text for uuencode.

   The text printed is the same whether selected with the `help' option
(`--help') or the `more-help' option (`--more-help').  `more-help' will
print the usage text by passing it through a pager program.
`more-help' is disabled on platforms without a working `fork(2)'
function.  The `PAGER' environment variable is used to select the
program, defaulting to `more'.  Both will exit with a status code of 0.

uuencode (GNU sharutils) - encode a file into email friendly text
Usage:  uuencode [ -<flag> | --<name> ]... [<in-file>] <output-name>

   -m, --base64               convert using base64
   -e, --encode-file-name     encode the output file name
   -v, --version[=MODE]       output version information and exit
   -h, --help                 display extended usage information and exit
   -!, --more-help            extended usage information passed thru pager
   -R, --save-opts[=FILE]     save the option state to a config file FILE
   -r, --load-opts=FILE       load options from the config file FILE
                                - disabled with '--no-load-opts'
                                - may appear multiple times

Options are specified by doubled hyphens and their name or by a single
hyphen and the flag character.

The following option preset mechanisms are supported:
 - reading file $HOME/.sharrc

'uuencode' is used to create an ASCII representation of a file that can be
sent over channels that may otherwise corrupt the data.  Specifically,
email cannot handle binary data and will often even insert a character when
the six character sequence "\nFrom " is seen.

'uuencode' will read 'in-file' if provided and otherwise read data from
standard in and write the encoded form to standard out.  The output will
begin with a header line for use by 'uudecode' giving it the resulting
suggested file 'output-name' and access mode.  If the 'output-name' is
specifically '/dev/stdout', then 'uudecode' will emit the decoded file to
standard out.

'Note': 'uuencode' uses buffered input and assumes that it is not hand
typed from a tty.  The consequence is that at a tty, you may need to hit
Ctl-D several times to terminate input.

Please send bug reports to:  <bug-gnu-utils@gnu.org>

Next: uuencode encode-file-name,  Prev: uuencode usage,  Up: uuencode Invocation

2.3.2 base64 option (-m)
------------------------

This is the "convert using base64" option.  By default, `uuencode' will
encode using the traditional conversion.  It is slower and less compact
than base64.  The encoded form of the file is expanded by 37% for UU
encoding and by 35% for base64 encoding (3 bytes become 4 plus control
information).

Next: uuencode config,  Prev: uuencode base64,  Up: uuencode Invocation

2.3.3 encode-file-name option (-e)
----------------------------------

This is the "encode the output file name" option.  Since output file
names may contain characters that are not handled well by various
transmission modes, you may specify that the `output-name' be base64
encoded as well.  (Traditional uuencoding of the file name is not
supported.)

Next: uuencode exit status,  Prev: uuencode encode-file-name,  Up: uuencode Invocation

2.3.4 presetting/configuring uuencode
-------------------------------------

Any option that is not marked as not presettable may be preset by
loading values from configuration ("rc" or "ini") files.

`libopts' will search in `$HOME' for configuration (option) data.  The
environment variable `HOME, ' is expanded and replaced when the program
runs If this is a plain file, it is simply processed.  If it is a
directory, then a file named `.sharrc' is searched for within that
directory.

   Configuration files may be in a wide variety of formats.  The basic
format is an option name followed by a value (argument) on the same
line.  Values may be separated from the option name with a colon, equal
sign or simply white space.  Values may be continued across multiple
lines by escaping the newline with a backslash.

   Multiple programs may also share the same initialization file.
Common options are collected at the top, followed by program specific
segments.  The segments are separated by lines like:
    [UUENCODE]
   or by
    <?program uuencode>
   Do not mix these styles within one configuration file.

   Compound values and carefully constructed string values may also be
specified using XML syntax:
    <option-name>
       <sub-opt>...&lt;...&gt;...</sub-opt>
    </option-name>
   yielding an `option-name.sub-opt' string value of
    "...<...>..."
   `AutoOpts' does not track suboptions.  You simply note that it is a
hierarchicly valued option.  `AutoOpts' does provide a means for
searching the associated name/value pair list (see: optionFindValue).

   The command line options relating to configuration and/or usage help
are:

version (-v)
............

Print the program version to standard out, optionally with licensing
information, then exit 0.  The optional argument specifies how much
licensing detail to provide.  The default is to print the license name
with the version.  The licensing infomation may be selected with an
option argument.  Only the first letter of the argument is examined:

`version'
     Only print the version.

`copyright'
     Name the copyright usage licensing terms.  This is the default.

`verbose'
     Print the full copyright usage licensing terms.

Next: uuencode Bugs,  Prev: uuencode config,  Up: uuencode Invocation

2.3.5 uuencode exit status
--------------------------

One of the following exit values will be returned:
`0 (EXIT_SUCCESS)'
     Successful program execution.

`1 (EXIT_FAILURE)'
     The operation failed or the command syntax was not valid.

`66 (EX_NOINPUT)'
     A specified configuration file could not be loaded.

`70 (EX_SOFTWARE)'
     libopts had an internal operational error.  Please report it to
     autogen-users@lists.sourceforge.net.  Thank you.

Next: uuencode Standards,  Prev: uuencode exit status,  Up: uuencode Invocation

2.3.6 uuencode Bugs
-------------------

Please put `sharutils' in the subject line for emailed bug reports.  It
helps to spot the message.

Next: uuencode History,  Prev: uuencode Bugs,  Up: uuencode Invocation

2.3.7 uuencode Standards
------------------------

This implementation is compliant with P1003.2b/D11.

Next: uuencode See Also,  Prev: uuencode Standards,  Up: uuencode Invocation

2.3.8 uuencode History
----------------------

The `uuencode' command first appeared in BSD 4.0.

Prev: uuencode History,  Up: uuencode Invocation

2.3.9 uuencode See Also
-----------------------

uudecode(1), uuencode(5)

